KEP-3243: respect pod topology spread after rolling upgrades (#3244)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3243-respect-pod-topology-spread-after-rolling-upgrades/README.md

users can also provide the customized key in  `MatchLabelKeys` to identify 
which pods should be grouped. If so, the user needs to ensure that it is 
correct and not duplicated with other unrelated workloads.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

`TopologySpreadConstraint` needs an extra field. The user fills in the 
`MatchLabelKeys` with the key of label. The scheduler plugin will look up 
the value from the incoming pod labels. Pods with the same key-value pairs 
will be treated as groups. The pods belonging to the same group will be part 
of the spreading in PodTopologySpread.

A new field named `MatchLabelKeys` will be introduced to`TopologySpreadConstraint`:
```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
	MaxSkew           int32
	TopologyKey       string
	WhenUnsatisfiable UnsatisfiableConstraintAction
	LabelSelector     *metav1.LabelSelector

> 	// MatchLabelKeys holds keys to labels whose values we did not know
> 	// before creating the pod. The scheduler plugin will obtain this
> 	// value from the incoming pod labels. Pods with the same key-value
> 	// pairs are considered a group. In the PodTopologySpread, the
> 	// spreading will include pods belonging to the same group. It is
> 	// an array of strings, each element representing a key of the
> 	// label. If the key does not exist, the element won't be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// MatchLabelKeys is a set of pod label keys to select the pods over which 
	// spreading will be calculated. The keys are used to lookup values from the
	// incoming pod labels, those key-value labels are ANDed with `LabelSelector`
	// to select the group of existing pods over which spreading will be calculated
	// for the incoming pod. Keys that don't exist in the incoming pod labels will
	// be ignored.
```

	MatchLabelKeys []string
}
```

Examples of use are as follows:
```yaml
     topologySpreadConstraints:
        - maxSkew: 1
          topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
          matchLabelKeys:
            - app
            - pod-template-hash
```

The scheduler plugin `PodTopologySpread` will obtain the labels from the pod 
labels by the keys in `matchLabelKeys`. The obtained labels will be merged 
to `labelSelector` of `topologySpreadConstraints` to filter and group pods. 

> The pods belonging to the same group will be part of the spreading in 

Reviewer 2: To `pod-template-hash`, we now have `pod-template-hash: <oldRevision` and `pod-template-hash: <newRevision>`, right? These selectors used to count the pod's number, so we would only consider the newRevision in calculation?

Author: Yes. If you use `pod-template-hash`, we will group the pods by revision in schedule plugin.

`PodTopologySpread`.

> 

Reviewer: Please mention the following:

```
Finally, the feature will be guarded by a new feature flag. If the feature is disabled, the field MatchLabelKeys 
is preserved if it was already set in the persisted Pod object, otherwise it is silently dropped; moreover, 
kube-scheduler will ignore the field and continue to behave as before.
```

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused 
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> This KEP defines a new field `MatchLabelKeys` in `TopologySpreadConstraint` 
> for end users to set the key of labels used to group Pods belonging to the 
> same workloads. Scheduler plugin will obtain the value from the pod labels 
> by the key and consider pods with the same key-value as a group . Then the 
> spreading will apply to pods belonging to the same group. This will allow end 
> users to set the keys to the labels whose values user doesn't know before 
> creating the pod like `revisions` in rolling upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pod topology spread feature allows users to define the group of pods over which spreading is applied using a LabelSelector. This means the user should know the exact label key and value when defining the pod spec.

This KEP proposes a complementary field to LabelSelector named `MatchLabelKeys` in `TopologySpreadConstraint` which represent a set of label keys only. The scheduler will use those keys to look up label values from the incoming pod; and those key-value labels are ANDed with `LabelSelector` to identify the group of existing pods over which the spreading skew will be calculated.

The main case that this new way for identifying pods will enable is constraining skew spreading calculation to happen at the revision level in Deployments during rolling upgrades.
```

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

> PodTopologySpread has been widely used in production environments, 
> especially the  online service. There is an issue with the rolling update 
> procedure of the online service in which the pod spread appears to be out  
> of balance ([98215](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/98215), 
> [105661](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105661),
> [k8s-pod-topology spread is not respected after rollout](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66510883/k8s-pod-topology-spread-is-not-respected-after-rollout)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PodTopologySpread is widely used in production environments, 
especially in service type workloads which employ Deployments. However, currently it has a limitation that manifests during rolling updates which causes the deployment to end up out  
of balance ([98215](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/98215), 
[105661](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105661),
[k8s-pod-topology spread is not respected after rollout](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66510883/k8s-pod-topology-spread-is-not-respected-after-rollout)). 
```

The root cause is that PodTopologySpread constraints allow defining a key-value 
label selector, which applies to all pods in a Deployment irrespective of their 
owning ReplicaSet. As a result, when a new revision is rolled out, spreading will 
apply across pods from both the old and new ReplicaSets, and so by the time the 
new ReplicaSet is completely rolled out and the old one is rolled back, the actual 
spreading we are left with may not match expectations because the deleted pods from 
the older ReplicaSet will cause skewed distribution for the remaining pods.

Currently, users are given two solutions to this problem. The first is to add a 

> revision  label to Deployment and update it manually at each rolling upgrade(both 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
revision  label to Deployment and update it manually at each rolling upgrade (both 
```

the label on the podTemplate and the selector in the podTopologySpread constraint),
while the second is to deploy a descheduler to re-balance the pod 

> distribution. User feedback suggests that the experience isn't very good. 
> In this proposal, we propose a native way to maintain pod balance after a  
> rolling upgrade in PodTopologySpread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distribution. The former solution isn't user friendly and requires manual tuning, which is error prone; while the latter requires installing and maintaining an extra controller. 
In this proposal, we propose a native way to maintain pod balance after a  
rolling upgrade in Deployments that use PodTopologySpread.
```

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha
- Feature implemented behind feature gate.
- Unit and integration tests passed as designed in [TestPlan](#test-plan).

#### Beta
- Feature is enabled by default
- Benchmark tests passed, and there is no performance degradation.
- Update documents to reflect the changes.

#### GA
- No negative feedback.
- Update documents to reflect the changes.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

> In the event of an upgrade, kube-apiserver will start accept and store the field `MatchLabelKeys`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of an upgrade, kube-apiserver will start to accept and store the field `MatchLabelKeys`.
```

	// incoming pod labels, those key-value labels are ANDed with `LabelSelector`
	// to select the group of existing pods over which spreading will be calculated
	// for the incoming pod. Keys that don't exist in the incoming pod labels will
	// be ignored.
	MatchLabelKeys []string
}
```

Examples of use are as follows:
```yaml
     topologySpreadConstraints:
        - maxSkew: 1
          topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
          matchLabelKeys:
            - app
            - pod-template-hash
```

The scheduler plugin `PodTopologySpread` will obtain the labels from the pod 
labels by the keys in `matchLabelKeys`. The obtained labels will be merged 
to `labelSelector` of `topologySpreadConstraints` to filter and group pods. 
The pods belonging to the same group will be part of the spreading in 
`PodTopologySpread`.

Finally, the feature will be guarded by a new feature flag. If the feature is 
disabled, the field `matchLabelKeys` is preserved if it was already set in the 
persisted Pod object, otherwise it is silently dropped; moreover, kube-scheduler 
will ignore the field and continue to behave as before.

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer 3: Please adopt to the new test plan guidelines:

https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/NNNN-kep-template#test-plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

- Unit and integration tests:
  - Feature gate enable/disable tests
  - `MatchLabelKeys` in `TopologySpreadConstraint` works as expected
- Benchmark tests:

>   - Verify no significant performance degradation

Reviewer 3: In existing benchmarks? Or new ones?

I'm assuming existing don't exercise the newly added feature - are we ok with it?

Author: I plan to benchmark this using the exist cases in `k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration/scheduler_perf` to verify if there's no significant performance degradation.
